assets/mkdocs/guide/webhooks.md, before:

# Webhooks

Webhooks let WebMACS push real-time notifications to external systems whenever specific events occur. Use them to integrate with Slack, Microsoft Teams, custom dashboards, or any HTTP endpoint.

!!! info "Admin only"
    Webhook management requires an **admin** account.

---

## How It Works

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant S as Sensor
    participant B as WebMACS Backend
    participant W as Your Webhook Endpoint

    S->>B: New datapoint
    B->>B: Check rules & webhooks
    B->>W: POST payload (JSON)
    W-->>B: 200 OK
    B->>B: Log delivery ✓
```

1. A trigger occurs (new sensor reading, threshold exceeded, experiment started/stopped, …)
2. WebMACS finds all **enabled** webhook subscriptions matching that event type
3. A JSON payload is sent via HTTP POST to each matching URL
4. The delivery result is logged (success, failure, status code)

---

## Webhook Event Types

| Event Type | When It Fires |
|---|---|
| `sensor.reading` | Every time a new sensor datapoint is recorded |
| `sensor.threshold_exceeded` | An [automation rule](rules.md) triggers a threshold violation |
| `experiment.started` | An experiment is created and begins running |
| `experiment.stopped` | An experiment is stopped |
| `system.health_changed` | System health status changes (degraded / recovered) |

!!! tip "Choose wisely"
    Subscribing to `sensor.reading` generates a webhook delivery for **every** datapoint — potentially hundreds per minute. For most integrations, `sensor.threshold_exceeded` is more useful.

---

## Creating a Webhook

### Via the UI

1. Navigate to **Webhooks** in the sidebar (admin only)
2. Click **New Webhook**
3. Fill in the fields:

| Field | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|
| **URL** | Yes | The endpoint to receive POST requests (use HTTPS in production) |
| **Secret** | No | Shared secret for HMAC-SHA256 signature verification |
| **Event Types** | Yes | Select one or more event types to subscribe to |
| **Active** | Yes | Toggle to enable or disable deliveries |

4. Click **Create**

### Via the API

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/api/v1/webhooks \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "url": "https://hooks.example.com/services/T.../B.../xxx",
    "secret": "my-shared-secret",
    "events": ["sensor.threshold_exceeded", "experiment.stopped"],
    "enabled": true
  }'
```

!!! warning "Duplicate URLs"
    Each URL can only be registered once. Attempting to create a duplicate returns **409 Conflict**.

---

## Payload Format

Every delivery sends a JSON body:

```json
{
  "type": "sensor.threshold_exceeded",
  "time": "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "sensor": "Inlet Temperature",
  "value": 215.3,
  "device": "webmacs-prod-01"
}
```

The `data` fields vary by event type. Experiment events include `experiment_name` and `experiment_id`.

---

## HMAC Signature Verification

If you set a **secret**, every delivery includes two headers for security:

| Header | Value |
|---|---|
| `X-Webhook-Signature` | `sha256=<hex-digest>` |
| `X-Webhook-Timestamp` | Unix timestamp of the delivery |

The HMAC is computed over `{timestamp}.{payload_body}` using SHA-256.

### Verification Example (Python)

```python
import hmac, hashlib

def verify(secret: str, timestamp: str, body: bytes, signature: str) -> bool:
    message = f"{timestamp}.".encode() + body
    expected = hmac.new(secret.encode(), message, hashlib.sha256).hexdigest()
    return hmac.compare_digest(f"sha256={expected}", signature)
```

!!! tip "Replay protection"
    Reject deliveries where `X-Webhook-Timestamp` is more than 5 minutes old.

---

## Delivery Log

Each webhook has a delivery log accessible from the UI or API. Every delivery attempt is recorded with:

| Field | Description |
|---|---|
| **Status** | `pending` → `delivered` → or `failed` → `dead_letter` |
| **HTTP Status** | Response code from your endpoint (200, 500, timeout, …) |
| **Attempts** | Number of delivery attempts (max 3) |
| **Error** | Error message if failed |
| **Timestamp** | When the delivery was attempted / completed |

### Retry Behaviour

| Attempt | Delay | Total Wait |
|---|---|---|
| 1st retry | 2 seconds | 2 s |
| 2nd retry | 4 seconds | 6 s |
| 3rd retry | 8 seconds | 14 s |

After 3 failed retries, the delivery is marked as **dead_letter**. It will not be retried automatically.

### Viewing Deliveries via API

```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/api/v1/webhooks/$WEBHOOK_ID/deliveries \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```

Filter by status: `?status=failed`

---

## Integration Examples

=== "Slack"

    Use a [Slack Incoming Webhook](https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks) URL:

    ```
    https://hooks.example.com/services/T00000000/B00000000/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
    ```

    Slack expects a `text` field, so you may need a proxy/transform layer.

=== "Microsoft Teams"

    Use a Teams [Incoming Webhook connector](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoftteams/platform/webhooks-and-connectors/how-to/add-incoming-webhook) URL.

=== "Custom API"

    Point the webhook at any HTTPS endpoint that accepts POST with JSON body and returns 2xx.

---

## Best Practices

!!! tip "Recommendations"
    - **Always use HTTPS** in production environments
    - **Set a webhook secret** and verify HMAC signatures to prevent spoofing
    - **Monitor the delivery log** — failed deliveries indicate connectivity or endpoint issues
    - **Disable unused webhooks** to reduce unnecessary network traffic
    - **Use `sensor.threshold_exceeded`** instead of `sensor.reading` for alerting — it fires only when rules trigger, not on every reading
    - **Set appropriate timeouts** on your receiving endpoint — WebMACS waits up to 10 seconds per delivery

---

## Next Steps

- [Automation Rules](rules.md) — define thresholds that trigger `sensor.threshold_exceeded` webhooks
- [Events & Sensors](events.md) — configure what is monitored
- [API Reference](../api/rest.md) — full webhook endpoint documentation

Commit message:

docs: add Custom Dashboard + Integration USP sections, fix HMAC and drag-drop claims

assets/mkdocs/guide/webhooks.md, after:

# Webhooks

## Push Events to Any System — Automatically

Webhooks turn WebMACS into an **active participant** in your infrastructure.
Instead of polling for changes, external systems receive instant notifications
the moment something happens — a sensor spikes, an experiment ends, or the
system health degrades.

Combined with the [REST API](../api/rest.md) and [WebSocket streaming](../api/websocket.md),
webhooks complete the integration trifecta: **pull, stream, and push**. See
[Integrations & Extensibility](integrations.md) for the full picture.

!!! info "Admin only"
    Webhook management requires an **admin** account.

---

## How It Works

```mermaid
sequenceDiagram
    participant S as Sensor
    participant B as WebMACS Backend
    participant W as Your Webhook Endpoint

    S->>B: New datapoint
    B->>B: Check rules & webhooks
    B->>W: POST payload (JSON)
    W-->>B: 200 OK
    B->>B: Log delivery ✓
```

1. A trigger occurs (new sensor reading, threshold exceeded, experiment started/stopped, …)
2. WebMACS finds all **enabled** webhook subscriptions matching that event type
3. A JSON payload is sent via HTTP POST to each matching URL
4. The delivery result is logged (success, failure, status code)

---

## Webhook Event Types

| Event Type | When It Fires |
|---|---|
| `sensor.reading` | Every time a new sensor datapoint is recorded |
| `sensor.threshold_exceeded` | An [automation rule](rules.md) triggers a threshold violation |
| `experiment.started` | An experiment is created and begins running |
| `experiment.stopped` | An experiment is stopped |
| `system.health_changed` | System health status changes (degraded / recovered) |

!!! tip "Choose wisely"
    Subscribing to `sensor.reading` generates a webhook delivery for **every** datapoint — potentially hundreds per minute. For most integrations, `sensor.threshold_exceeded` is more useful.

---

## Creating a Webhook

### Via the UI

1. Navigate to **Webhooks** in the sidebar (admin only)
2. Click **New Webhook**
3. Fill in the fields:

| Field | Required | Description |
|---|---|---|
| **URL** | Yes | The endpoint to receive POST requests (use HTTPS in production) |
| **Secret** | No | Shared secret for HMAC-SHA256 signature verification |
| **Event Types** | Yes | Select one or more event types to subscribe to |
| **Active** | Yes | Toggle to enable or disable deliveries |

4. Click **Create**

### Via the API

```bash
curl -X POST http://localhost:8000/api/v1/webhooks \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN" \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{
    "url": "https://hooks.example.com/services/T.../B.../xxx",
    "secret": "my-shared-secret",
    "events": ["sensor.threshold_exceeded", "experiment.stopped"],
    "enabled": true
  }'
```

!!! warning "Duplicate URLs"
    Each URL can only be registered once. Attempting to create a duplicate returns **409 Conflict**.

---

## Payload Format

Every delivery sends a JSON body:

```json
{
  "type": "sensor.threshold_exceeded",
  "time": "2025-01-15T10:30:00Z",
  "sensor": "Inlet Temperature",
  "value": 215.3,
  "device": "webmacs-prod-01"
}
```

The `data` fields vary by event type. Experiment events include `experiment_name` and `experiment_id`.

---

## HMAC Signature Verification

If you set a **secret**, every delivery includes two headers for security:

| Header | Value |
|---|---|
| `X-Webhook-Signature` | `<hex-digest>` (bare HMAC-SHA256 hex) |
| `X-Webhook-Timestamp` | Unix timestamp of the delivery |

The HMAC is computed over `{timestamp}.{payload_body}` using SHA-256.

### Verification Example (Python)

```python
import hmac, hashlib

def verify(secret: str, timestamp: str, body: bytes, signature: str) -> bool:
    message = f"{timestamp}.".encode() + body
    expected = hmac.new(secret.encode(), message, hashlib.sha256).hexdigest()
    return hmac.compare_digest(expected, signature)
```

!!! tip "Replay protection"
    Reject deliveries where `X-Webhook-Timestamp` is more than 5 minutes old.

---

## Delivery Log

Each webhook has a delivery log accessible via the API. Every delivery attempt is recorded with:

| Field | Description |
|---|---|
| **Status** | `pending` → `delivered` → or `failed` → `dead_letter` |
| **HTTP Status** | Response code from your endpoint (200, 500, timeout, …) |
| **Attempts** | Number of delivery attempts (max 3) |
| **Error** | Error message if failed |
| **Timestamp** | When the delivery was attempted / completed |

### Retry Behaviour

| Attempt | Delay | Total Wait |
|---|---|---|
| 1st attempt | Immediate | — |
| 2nd attempt | 2 seconds | 2 s |
| 3rd attempt | 4 seconds | 6 s |

After 3 total attempts, the delivery is marked as **dead_letter** and will not be retried.

!!! note "Delivery log"
    Delivery history is available via the API (`GET /webhooks/{id}/deliveries`). A UI delivery log viewer is planned for a future release.

### Viewing Deliveries via API

```bash
curl http://localhost:8000/api/v1/webhooks/$WEBHOOK_ID/deliveries \
  -H "Authorization: Bearer $TOKEN"
```

Filter by status: `?status=failed`

---

## Integration Examples

=== "Slack"

    Use a [Slack Incoming Webhook](https://api.slack.com/messaging/webhooks) URL:

    ```
    https://hooks.example.com/services/T00000000/B00000000/XXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXXX
    ```

    Slack expects a `text` field, so you may need a proxy/transform layer.

=== "Microsoft Teams"

    Use a Teams [Incoming Webhook connector](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/microsoftteams/platform/webhooks-and-connectors/how-to/add-incoming-webhook) URL.

=== "Custom API"

    Point the webhook at any HTTPS endpoint that accepts POST with JSON body and returns 2xx.

---

## Best Practices

!!! tip "Recommendations"
    - **Always use HTTPS** in production environments
    - **Set a webhook secret** and verify HMAC signatures to prevent spoofing
    - **Monitor the delivery log** — failed deliveries indicate connectivity or endpoint issues
    - **Disable unused webhooks** to reduce unnecessary network traffic
    - **Use `sensor.threshold_exceeded`** instead of `sensor.reading` for alerting — it fires only when rules trigger, not on every reading
    - **Set appropriate timeouts** on your receiving endpoint — WebMACS waits up to 10 seconds per delivery

---

## Next Steps

- [Automation Rules](rules.md) — define thresholds that trigger `sensor.threshold_exceeded` webhooks
- [Events & Sensors](events.md) — configure what is monitored
- [API Reference](../api/rest.md) — full webhook endpoint documentation
